i express charge with Chopra Shores
steel drum lesons and today we're going
to talk about chord changes a lot of
people asked me about chord changes
concerning the songs they'll say things
like what does the chord change and what
are you talking about and you keep
mentioning chord tones what are you
talking about well here's what I'm
talking about let's just pick a key
let's pick C major and I'll do there'll
be a lot of annotations about what
scales are talking about but any song
you play has cord changes behind it or
has a a fundamental chord change that
goes with the with the song so what
we're talking about is what court are
those that if you wanted to play the
chord behind it what are they how do you
figure out what they are well let's just
take the key of C C is probably the most
easiest key to work with C just has
these these notes c d e f g a b c now
what i would do is i would write that
cut that those eight letters out several
times back to back like like it's
annotated so what you're going to look
for is the key of c the first part we're
going to talk about is the C chord
whatever chord you start with the name
of the court and we start with the
lowest part of the court so if it's a C
chord it's going to have these notes in
it C E and G and the way I remember that
is I take the first note the C and I'll
go okay play the C skip the D play the e
skip the app like G so it's play skip
place get a place give these are also
called triads three notes that's how you
figure out what you know what you need
though you play the first one skip the
second you need the first it's a third
and the fifth of that of any chord let's
say we're going to do the F chord well
go to F
play it skip one go to a skip one go to
C now I even have that a seat but in
this particular key we're just going to
use c e g now i'm going to play it on
the steel drum like this
now if I had three mouths which I do I
can play them together can't really do
that when you're playing steel drums a
lot because you're busy playing the
melody but you could see I'm playing
them together as a triad a chord like
this we call that initiating them or
playing them separately and when I talk
about chord tones I'm talking about
those three see EMG are the chord tones
of the C chord F AC is the are the chord
tones of the F chord and I can play that
chord like this will tell you which one
you're gonna play so the C chord the G
chord go to G play skip play skip so we
have G B and D the G chord so those are
the core tones of the G chord now in the
key of C let's start on C and say that C
in this particular situation is the one
chord because it is the first part of
the scale now when you go to neverkey
the one becomes something else we call
that a moveable dough that means that
one in this particular key has a
different function than the one in half
the one chord a nap would be the F chord
the one in C is the C chord so that
means that you have to renumber all of
them all of the chords in a different
key but for our purposes today C is the
one chord D is the two chord and so on
and so forth you get all the way up to
the B form of B D and F mm-hmm we
normally play the C chord with one point
the four chord the 5 chord so we have
the one chord c e g and the forecourt
fac and the five chord G B D very common
chords so a lot of songs if those are
the only three chords you're working
with the good news is that if you want
to do if you want to do something
improvisation as long as you're not
going outside that little box you can
play the C scale and any way you want
and every
will sound great yes some those sound
better than others but any notes you
play that's in this family of C the C
scale sounds great so let's let's
imagine that the chords are like this
the C chord what I'm doing is called
copy like a piano player would do this
whole comment on copying the chord
changes
I'm not soloing on I'm copying now if I
want to so all I can go now keep in mind
these chord changes like as they go by
the C chord I'm in are cut you see at
this time I just played the chord tones
in a particularly that I just decided I
liked I could have done as long as you
play the chord tones you can make up
whatever rhythm goes with a song it's up
to you but that's a great way to start
improvising is just knowing the quarks
that go by and be able to play the chord
tones of the chords that go by that's
the first step in my opinion to
improvisation is knowing what what's
what notice we have to work with and
then maybe going okay this time I'm
gonna do the scale
I made some repetition on some notes but
I just played the C scale when you do
that anything that's not the melody
sounds great
as long as it's different has a little
rhythm you can use repetition the things
that I always talk about repetition in
stablishment did a little embellishment
on the e here's the e I did the E flat
before very quickly things like that
sound really good what I would recommend
is start with songs that don't have
complicated chord changes and have a lot
of repetition in there for change so
that you don't have to do a lot of
twisting and turning you just stick with
certain chords that's the very first
thing I'm gonna do if I want to learn to
improvise and then find some things that
sound good to you as one of those
improvisational things like repetition
scales double stops fighting some of
that stuff and get comfortable with that
and then move to another song in a
different piece so you start get
comfortable being in those keys and
things well that's it for this time I
want to thank you for watching I want to
thank you for your comments and your
support of the videos if I would like
you to subscribe to the video that way
you'll see them come out of every Sunday
night and if you have any steel drum
sheet music needs please visit the top
of Shor's net and also if you'd like to
visit pamela named calm it's a site for
steel drummers and you can see videos on
their pictures there's some music
sometimes it's downloadable and free and
printable all kinds of things like that
and you'll see steel drum players from
all over the world
thanks again we'll see it